Hello family, Tyler here.
I wanted to take a moment to invite you to Bridgetown's 8th Annual Holy Spirit Conference, January 23rd and 24th at Portland's, Colorado.
The theme of this year's conference is going to be the healing after the healing.
We'll be exploring how the miraculous work of the Holy Spirit is often just the first step to the deeper, slower soul level healing.
Like the man-born blind in John 9, each part of us God heals only exposes a deeper part of us awaiting healing from the same God.
And the deepest healing is often the slowest kind.
We're so excited to be joined by contributors like Ruth Haley Barton, Kurt Thompson, Ken Shigamatsu, and Brooke Ligertwood.
Tickets are available now at bridgetown.church.com.
I hope you can join us.
Devote yourselves to prayer, being watchful and thankful, and pray for us too that God may open a door for our message so that we may proclaim the mystery of Christ for which I am in chains.
Pray that I'm a proclaim it clearly as I should.
Be wise in the way you act towards outsiders.
Make the most of every opportunity.
Let your conversation be always full of grace, seasoned with salt, so that you may know how to answer everyone.
This is the word of the Lord.
Thanks be to God.
I have always done my clearest thinking first thing in the morning and always done my most honest praying while walking.
So in my 12 years in New York City, I walked pretty much the same lap around my neighborhood and prayer every single morning.
It was early enough there would still be dark out and so I was almost always nearly the only one on the typically crowded sidewalks with one consistent exception.
There was this
One bar in my neighborhood that stayed open later than everywhere else and it was one of those kind of rough around the edges joints that always smells like stale beer and cheap burgers and there was a same woman who would always be wiping down the counters of this place at around five in the morning when I walked by and the same man who would always be hosing off the sidewalks out front and so I would always cross the street to avoid the splatter and I would carry on in my
prayerful plea for today's work agenda or a need that existed in my home or adoration at the God who set the stars in the sky that I could faintly see on the clearest of mornings.
That was our routine, the four of us, the praying pastor, the immigrant couple, and the God who spoke every last one of us into being.
And then one day it finally occurred to me that maybe these two weren't an interruption to my prayers, but the very center of them.
And that morning I stopped and I watched and I thought about their lives, about the hour plus subway commute they undoubtedly took to arrive at that place every morning and about the life they must have had in their country of origin, about how difficult that life must have been to make the one they were living preferable.
and not just preferable, but valuable, so valuable that they would leave family and comfort to navigate systems and languages and do all of it just to lay claim of a life of cleaning up spilled alcohol and cigarette butts from those who have everything in common with them, save the geographical lottery of their origin point.
And I thought about the God that I was praying to, about a God whose developmental years were spent navigating the systems and languages of an immigrant who had fled circumstances in Israel so bad that Egypt was preferable, even valuable, a God who spent more time as a blue-collar grunt worker than he did as a teacher and a miracle worker, and a God who had decided preference for the company of folks like these that I had crossed the street to maintain a distance from.
And on this particular morning, I noticed the dignity with which they worked, how she wiped down the counter, humming and delighting, charging her rag and mop with the very image of the God that I prayed to.
And the way he looked up at me and smiled, welcoming me, a stranger, like a friend, filling our language-restricted interaction with the image of the God that I prayed to, these two,
If only I had eyes to see were not an interruption to my prayers, but an invitation to deepen them.
And it all prompted a question for me, one I've never been able to shake, one I hope I never do shake, a question that goes something like this.
How do I pull my prayers down from the majesty of the stars above to the sidewalk below?
How do I pray in such a way that
doesn't escape the mess for a brief enlightened moment at dawn, but welcomes God into the mess of the day that I'm just beginning.
That same question came rushing back to me again here in Portland on the first day of school in our second year in the city.
I was dropping Hank off for his first day of second grade and Simon for his first day of kindergarten.
We were that unbearable family taking pictures together in front of the classroom door.
I was already in a rush to take off as soon as the school bell rang, because I had a full day with a packed agenda, but I noticed Kirsten calling every other parent by name and asking about their summer travels and checking in on their siblings and so on, and I was confronted by the tragic irony of it all.
That I spent an hour in prayer every morning walking and talking to God in a wonder-struck eloquent
dialogue on the sidewalks of Portland.
But Kirsten, I'm watching as she's living the prayers that I'm praying.
And so again, I pray, oh gracious God, would you give me more than prayerful words, but would you give me a prayer shaped life?
Would you bring my prayers down from the stars they gaze upon to the ground that I stand on and to the mess down here into my parenting and my husbanding and my befriending and my living and my relating?
You see, the fruit of prayer, and this might surprise you at first, but the fruit of prayer isn't only about miraculous intervention and divine action.
Even more than that, the fruit of prayer is about what happens within the praying person over time after all of our amends.
The real fruit of prayer is the way that it reforms the praying person to see their ordinary world through the eyes of Jesus and then respond in kind.
Praying is an exercise training me to drag the majesty of heaven down onto Brooklyn sidewalks and into Portland school yards.
If you will let him, Jesus will bring prayer closer than you were ready for when you started praying.
Closer than just the power to change the world around you through your secret whispers, but close enough to change the world within you through those secret whispers so that the world around you follows suit behind your prayer shaped life.
I guess what I'm trying to get at here is that as you grow up in the life of prayer, you will become less enamored by what happens between all your dear gods and amens, and a lot more attentive to who you are becoming in your ordinary life after all of your amens.
Devote yourselves to prayer.
counseled the Apostle Paul to the Colossian community of Jesus' apprentices with some final words in the letter about prioritizing the spiritual practice of prayer.
But in the very same breath, he quickly gets to verse five, be wise in the way you act toward outsiders, making the most of every opportunity.
Let your conversation be always full of grace seasoned with salt so that you may know how to answer everyone.
So Paul seems to assume
that the conversation that we begin with God in secret quickly becomes the actions and the conversations that we pick up with our neighbors in public.
Paul, the very guy who said pray without ceasing, seems to imagine a life of undending prayer, not as one where the dialogue of prayer never stops, but one where the life of prayer never stops.
Devote yourselves to prayer.
That's where it all begins, though.
It is the source and the origin point of daily bread and kingdom come alike.
In this English word, devote, it is the Greek term, proskaterreo.
It's a word that is used 10 times in the Bible, almost always in reference to prayer.
Acts chapter 1, they all joined together or devoted themselves constantly in prayer.
Acts two, they devoted themselves to the apostles' teaching and to fellowship to the breaking of bread and to prayer.
Acts six, we will turn this responsibility over to them and we will give our attention or our devotion, our proschetario to prayer.
Romans chapter 12, be joyful and hope, patient and affliction, faithful or devoted in
prayer.
We get an even more fully formed understanding, though, of what this word devoted really means by its alternative uses, by the few times in Scripture that it's used in reference to something other than prayer, like in Acts 10, which speaks of a devout soldier who was one of Cornelius' attendants, and in Romans 13, which speaks of civil servants devoting their time to governing.
So the Bible uses this word, Proskia Terreo, to refer
to the secular vocation of those outside of the church, but then repurposes a vocational word and applies it to all followers of Jesus, naming prayer as your and my primary vocation, the ends to which the bulk of our time, energy, and attention should be given, the center that our lives orbit around.
You see, in the life of the disciple, there are many good things.
work and obligations, appointments, and needs, friends, and neighbors, but there's only one devotion.
There's just one center around which everything else revolves, finding its proper place and the work and the order that sustains and gives life.
And that's prayer.
In your life, you can have many priorities, but you only get one devotion.
And Jesus himself said, no one can serve two masters.
You go, hate the one and love the other or you'll be
devoted to the one and despised the other.
In context, of course, Jesus is speaking about the competing allegiance of Mammon, but the principle here holds for any alternative devotion.
So if all of this is biblically speaking, a vocational concept about the primary devotion of my time, energy, and attention, then it's worth asking, if someone observed me inside and out for a week,
If they heard every thought that passed through my mind and observed every minute of every one of my days, if they watched my habits and practices and priorities objectively, who or what would they say that I am devoted to?
Like what priority do I find a way to uphold no matter what?
What do I manage to purchase when my paychecks are fat and when they're thin?
What do I always live with but never without?
When life goes as planned and gets interrupted when I'm doing well and just barely getting by, what do I always seem to get in?
Who or what am I devoted to?
Am I devoted to my ambition?
Like how much of my mental energy goes toward my career pursuits?
How preoccupied am I by my boss or coworkers opinions?
How closely do I watch my inbox after turning in a project?
How inflated am I by a positive remark and how anxious by a critical one?
How badly do I need to succeed?
How much does it scare me not to?
And who gave me the definition of success that I carry around?
Am I devoted to my social circle?
How much emotional energy do I expend people pleasing at work or peacemaking in my family or competing, criticizing, gossiping and one-upping?
Am I the one who shows up to every happy hour and says yes to every invitation?
Do I spend more time on my social media profile than my soul?
Do I share a million conversations with others but barely whisper a word to the one who spoke me into being?
Am I devoted to my body?
How much of my mind's attention is spent on my diet, my planning, and my calorie counting about what I'll eat today or how what I will eat today will make up for the indulgence that I gave myself into last night?
How much of my time is given to exercise, to the perfecting of my body, to the pursuit of my goal weight, or my ideal figure?
How much regard do I give my physical appearance?
What story do my finances tell me about how much I value maintaining the youth of my complexion or the fashion of my wardrobe or the tone of my skin?
Am I devoted to pleasure?
How much of the work week do I spend planning the weekend?
And how satisfied am I with having nothing going on?
Or how often do I find myself there?
What do I use as a means for escape?
Food, drink?
screens, shopping, activity, people.
Look, there's plenty of reasons to be devoted to prayer, but the first and most obvious one is just this, that any other devotion makes you less.
Only prayer makes you more.
Devote yourself to your ambition and you will climb the corporate ladder until you fall.
And it'll hurt, but you'll get up and you'll keep on climbing and climbing until you've passed your whole life on a ladder that you never got to the top of and forgot why you needed to reach the top rung so badly anyway.
Or maybe worse, you will actually get to the top and then you'll spend more energy fighting off other people who are climbing up to take your spot than you ever did getting there until one day, like a toddler, you're told it's time to let someone else have a turn and then you'll are you and Pat because no one seems to remember or care how long you spent at the top.
Devote yourself to a social circle and you'll feel every minute, every thought you will expend every ounce of energy keeping people happy.
People whose happiness is a riddle, they haven't solved themselves.
So how possibly could you?
You will keep plenty of people happy by hiding your true self for so long that you'll lose track of who you are and what you want and what makes you happy and you'll never draw forth the real them either.
Devote yourself to your body and you will never feel beautiful enough.
You will always be working on yourself.
You will turn everyone else you see into a comparison, making certain that neither you nor the other will ever be enough.
Neither of you seem to the eyes of the one who fashioned you both.
Neither of you honored for the eternity that lives within you both.
Devote yourself to pleasure to your choice means of escape, and you will escape your life's responsibilities with increasing frequency and for longer and longer stretches until you wake up one day to realize you've evacuated altogether.
that you had just one shot at being a mom or dad or son or daughter or friend or lover or disciple.
And you traded it for being the life of your preferred party, a party that everyone else left without you noticing.
Now here you are, turning the lights out alone.
Devote yourself to prayer though, and everything else in your life will fall into proper order.
It will find alignment, and you will not be the center of the story you're living, but rather you will find yourself revolving around a center where life is maintained and sustained through changing seasons and passing years.
Who or what am I devoted to?
I'm not aspirationally, but honestly.
What is my life, my time, my thoughts, my energy, my finances?
What is it all orbit around?
It was a couple years ago when I was confronted by this very question and by the realization that I really wanted my answer to be prayer.
And there was a time when it was, but then
For me, somewhere along the way, in all the coming and going, pastoring and riding, errands and tasks, somewhere in the shuffle of it all, I lost sight of the center around which everything else orbits to sustain life.
Lesser loves have a way of doing this, of kind of slowly, subtly nudging their way into the seat of your life's devotion.
Who or what am I devoted to?
And whenever you can be honest enough,
with yourself to answer that question.
Here's a couple that should follow very closely on its heels.
Do I want to become who it's making me?
And do I get to keep what it's giving me?
Who am I devoted to?
And do I actually want to become what it's making me?
And even if I do, do I get to keep in this life and into the next?
whatever it's given.
My humble conviction is that I want to be devoted to prayer.
And my honest discovery is that a life of prayer is lived on three mountains, Mount Tabor, the Mount of Olives, and Golgotha, a brief, closer look at each.
Let's begin with Mount Tabor, because before that became a mountain in East Portland where you walked off your annual Thanksgiving feast, it was first the mountain that Jesus climbs with Peter, James, and John, leaving the other nine disciples waiting at the bottom.
It's on this mountain that Jesus was transfigured, glowing with the beaming image of God's glory.
Matthew 17, a bright cloud covered them, and a voice from the cloud said, this is my son, whom I love, with him I am well pleased.
listen to him.
Now this is one of three distinct accounts where the Father spoke audibly over the life of the Son.
There's the transfiguration, what we just read, and before this there was Jesus' baptism, and shortly after it, the Father's voice is heard in the temple during Jesus' final week, and the three messages from the Father are nearly identical.
At His baptism we hear, you are my Son, whom I love, with you I am well pleased.
And then a glow on table we hear, this is my son, whom I love, with him I am well pleased.
At the temple during Jesus' final week, he cries, Father, glorify your name.
And then a voice comes from heaven saying, I have glorified it and we'll glorify it again.
In context, it's, you're already bringing me glory, son.
Not in some future aspiration of who you might become, but in who you are today.
Surely the three occasions where we eavesdrop in on Trinitarian dialogue are some of the standout moments in Scripture, right?
I mean, you would think God would have used the opportunity to say something a bit more productive, like to rebuke the corrupt priests or the Roman oppressors or to call Israel to repentance or to explain the meaning of life once and for all.
But when God spoke loud enough for His Son and the whole world to hear, He only ever had one message.
I love you and I'm proud of you.
There is no discovery that you will ever make more formative than the revelation of the Father's love for you.
And the Father's love cannot be learned, only discovered.
If we are to know the Father's love, it's going to take something more than a solid theological library and sound doctrine.
We can get belief through knowledge shared with us by others, but knowing like the relational and experiential variety, that requires that I believe objectively and also experience subjectively.
And as long as we're talking about textbooks and math problems, objective information is going to do just fine, but the second we switch to something like relationship, then the subjective becomes essential.
Subjectivity gets a really bad rap in a culture like ours that's obsessed with the cognitive.
But love between two people is the most universally pursued human experience.
It is the core plot to every film.
It is the chorus of every song in the top 40.
And love cannot be learned.
Only discovered.
So here are the father's affirmation over you.
You are my daughter.
You are my son.
whom I love.
With you, I am well pleased."
Now that's not all prayer is, but it is the only foundation upon which to build a life of prayer.
You cannot sustain a life of prayer by believing in the power of prayer.
You sustain a life of prayer by believing I am the beloved of God.
He is my son and my shield.
He is the warmth on my face on life's best days.
And he is the shelter in the storm on life's worst.
He is the one who trains my hands for battle and he is the one who binds up my wounds when I come home injured.
I'm not advocating for prayer today because I'm super into the spiritual practice of prayer or even because I'm really convinced about the power of prayer.
I believe in both of those things, but I'm devoted to prayer because I've come to believe that life to the full starts and ends with remaining in the love of God.
And that's what prayer is.
Both Matthew and Mark's Gospels show us that when Jesus returns from this mountaintop encounter, he is greeted by an absolute mess waiting on him in the village below.
His disciples are trying to heal a boy of epilepsy and it's not going well to put it very politely.
And so Jesus then heals and delivers this boy and then his disciples ask him, verse 19, why couldn't we drive it out?
He replied, because you have so little faith.
Truly, I tell you, if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, move from here to there, and it will move.
Nothing will be impossible for you.
Both Henry, now, and Ann, Dallas, Willard argue that the Greek word, pistis, which is translated here and appears frequently in the Bible, translated as faith, is actually best translated, trust.
Because faith is the active outward expression of an internal restored trust.
The serpent in the garden didn't attack Eve's faith, making her doubt God's power.
The serpent attacked Eve's trust, making her doubt God's love.
And that's what makes mountaintop moments in our spiritual lives useful.
They restored us a trust that the God that we heard on the mountaintop is the exact same in the valley.
And so we put trust into action, believing ourselves to be his beloved and acting in step with that belief long after the inspiration is worn off.
That's what Jesus means when he drops this famous mustard seed mountain moving line.
He's saying something like, if you believe that I am who you met on the mountaintop and you are my beloved, you will be untouchable by the deceiver of this world.
you will be able to effortlessly restore creation by heavenly power because you are rooted in a heavenly identity.
Prayer is the practice of beholding Jesus a glow and listening to the Father's voice, but prayer is also an invitation to live with a tinge of that glow still on my face after I say amen.
It's not to escape this world into a holy moment, but to glimpse my ordinary life.
on the sidewalks of Brooklyn or the schoolyard in Portland as a glow with the burning potential of all of those holy moments.
Will I trust that the God that I met in prayer is every bit as alive, interested, and involved after I say amen?
That is the mustard seed-sized faith that restores all of creation.
So prayer begins on Mount Tabor, but then it moves to the Mount of Olives.
Matthew, Mark, and Luke all remember this peak as the side of Jesus' arrest when he was interrupted by Judas and a team of officers while praying in Gethsemane.
Luke, though, points out this little tidbit, Luke 22, verse 39.
Jesus went out as usual to the Mount of Olives, and his disciples followed him.
This is a hint back to the previous chapter of Luke's gospel when he tells us that the whole of the week that we now call Holy Week, the final seven days of Jesus' life, he went to pray at the Mount of Olives every single night.
So this is more than just the side of one famous prayer.
This is a frequent favorite prayer spot of Jesus.
Matthew, Mark, and Luke all remember the same prayer that Jesus prayed on this mountain when he fell to his knees and through blood and sweat prayed, Father, if you are willing, take this cup from me, yet not what I will, but your will be done.
John's gospel, though, recalls a different prayer from the same mountain on the same night.
One that Jesus prayed on his way to the garden where he fell on his knees.
A prayer that is typically called the high priestly prayer.
And it's among the most joyful prayers, prayed in all of scripture.
So check this out.
On the final night of Jesus' life, Jesus prayed both joyfully and sorrowfully.
And both Jesus' joy and his sorrow are born from empathy.
He is empathetically excited about what he's going to share with you and I, and he is empathetically dreading all that he's about to endure for you and I. Jesus' internal world, as revealed by his prayers, is unique in this way, that for Jesus, power hasn't eroded empathy.
You see, the psychological consensus is that power in any form among any community at any stage of life
is bad for you.
If power was a prescription drug, it would come with a long list of side effects.
Power can intoxicate.
It can corrupt.
It can distort.
And that holds true whether we're talking about organizational power at a mid-level management, at a corporation, or the social power that you might hold, where you walk into a room where you're known and comfortable and others aren't, or being in the popular crowd at high school, or being in the in-group at work.
And it holds for the spiritual power of being called pastor, or teacher, or community leader, or head of the serving team.
Psychologist Dr. Keltner writes, once we have power, we lose some of the capacities we needed to get it in the first place.
He names this the power paradox, and it's backed by more than 20 years of lab and field experiments, all of which verify that people with power behave psychologically speaking pretty much identically to people who have gone through a traumatic brain injury.
They become more impulsive and less self-aware, less risk, averse, less adept at seeing their point of view through the eyes of another.
His conclusion is that people in power actually gained that power through empathy, meaning you gain social influence by seeing and understanding on the other in a way that would engender their trust.
And despite our best efforts,
at creating responsible org charts and structured review processes, that's the main way you move up at work, too.
Like, you gain the trust of the people that call the shots.
And it's the way that you gain spiritual authority in the life of someone else.
Empathy wins power.
But, Keltner continues, power then leaks empathy.
So the longer you have it, the less you have what got you that power in the first place.
Isn't that fascinating?
Empathy is the pathway to power and power is the Kryptonite of empathy.
This blew my mind, right?
So maybe the great power abuse scandals in recent history that have poured out of the corporate world and the political world and the church
aren't the result of a few bad apples, but the result of power's corrosive effect on seeing another with dignity and love, empathy.
This is one of the characteristics that makes Jesus so unique.
He operates in an extraordinary amount of power through empathy.
The power of the spirit that we see in Jesus doesn't erode empathy, it amplifies it.
How did that happen?
How did Jesus increase in power without decreasing in empathy?
Prayer.
Jesus was called both a glutton and a drunkard and a man of sorrows.
Jesus was accused and critiqued of being too joyful and too sorrowful.
And that's who prayer will make you, someone who holds both joy and sorrow authentically in tension.
Henry Nowhan says,
Prayer always leads us to the heart of God and the heart of the human struggle at the same time.
So prayer is where empathy is cultivated because prayer is where we identify with both the victorious promises of God and the present pains of the world simultaneously.
Prayer is the practice of joy and sorrow held together in tension in my one person.
Prayer is the practice of empathy.
Last spring, I spent a week teaching at a few different gatherings throughout the United Kingdom
And I took my mom with me and it was really, really special because first she'd never been to England, but secondly and more so because it is the only week that I have ever spent alone with her in my life to date and probably the only one that I ever will.
I've spent a ton of time with my mom
But I'm also the middle child of three boys.
And so growing up, I shared my mom with my dad and my brothers.
And now I share her with my dad, my brothers, and nine grandkids.
Every time we're together, we're surrounded by a sea of relatives.
But here we were on a 10-hour flight.
Just the two of us was seven days stretching out ahead of us.
And while we were there, she got word that her very best friend from high school was in critical condition and had just days to live.
And so right in front of me on that trip, separated by an ocean, she began to grieve.
And she was getting frequent updates from her family.
She was recalling memories of growing up together.
She was carrying some very real sorrow.
But she also wanted to remember this trip forever because it was so unique to treasure these few days that we had together.
And so on our last day in a little English countryside town, she pulled me into a CD tattoo parlor.
And we got matching tattoos to mark the moment.
So I'm just sitting there and I'm looking at my mom.
Here she is in her sixties getting inked up for the first time in her life.
And I guarantee you,
that in ten years that's the only thing either of us will remember about the trip.
I'll forget what we ate for dinner and whether our flights were on time or delayed and how it went and each of the teachings that I offered, but my mom agonizing in pain and laughing hysterically as that little needle drew a leaf on her ankle, I will remember that forever.
And so will she because she was sorrowful and grief.
but alive in joy, both at the same time.
Romans 12, 15 famously says, rejoice with those who rejoice, mourn with those who mourn.
In other words, cultivate empathy, says Paul.
That is a distinguishing marker of all of Jesus's apprentices.
Love the idea, but it's also a lot easier said than done because every person who lives in this world accrues some degree of power.
And power slowly, surely erodes the empathy that is required.
to enter into the joy and sorrow of others.
So how then?
How do we empathize with our fellow human beings?
How do we hold on to love so that we use every ounce of power we accumulate in service of love?
Well, just zoom out a little bit.
Paul already told us that part.
Romans chapter 12, beginning three verses before.
Be joyful and hope patient in affliction and devoted to prayer.
Proskaterreo.
Share with the Lord's people who are in need, practice hospitality, bless those who persecute you, bless and do not curse, rejoice with those who rejoice, mourn with those who mourn.
Do you want to grow old into the sort of person who weeps empathetically with a friend decades old from across the world and the sort of person who on the very same day says, stick a needle into me, buddy, because this body of mine is going to expire, but this memory with my son never will.
Do you want to grow old into someone who holds joy and sorrow together than devote yourself to prayer?
Because it is the only thing that will make you more and not less as you go on devoted to it over the days of your life.
And we tend to think or imagine that being devoted to prayer means that I'm going to grow more stoic and more religious and more serious about my life and my routines and my habits.
But if we're taking our cues from Jesus, it seems to me that a life more devoted to prayer means being devout about one relationship so that I can become more joyful and sorrowful in all of my other relationships.
Mount of all of prayers, the sort that open our eyes and wonder and drive us to our knees in agony.
It seems to me that they work together to form us into the sort of people who can express spiritual power through empathy.
A prayer shaped life is not a more stoic, more religious, or more serious life.
It's not even necessarily a life
of more time spent in prayer or more intense prayers that come out of me.
It's more joy and sorrow in all the moments that I go on living after I say Amen.
It is a life more full because of one solitary devotion.
One more mountain, Golgotha, the mountain or the hill on which Jesus was crucified.
Jesus' last word spoken from the cross, they were a prayer.
A prayer that was not original to Jesus, but one that he borrowed from the Psalm, Psalm 22, verse one.
My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?
But this prayer of Jesus is really important for a multitude of reasons, but one of them is certainly just the honest realization that a prayer shaped life is a more painful life.
To devote yourself to prayer is to welcome joy absolutely.
It is fullness of life.
But that fullness also includes sorrow of the most personal variety.
If you devote yourself to prayer, you will live more fully, you will laugh harder, you will be more present, you will cherish the precious moments, you will press each one of your days like a grape under your laughing feet to strain out the intoxicating wine within it.
And if you devote yourself to prayer, you will be confronted by more pain, by more disappointment,
by more deafening silence, by more heart-rending disillusionment.
In a God-empowered but serpent-deceived world, you do not get one without the other.
If you want to ascend taper to see Jesus aglow and hear the Father's voice over you, if you want to ascend Gethsemane to grow old into a woman that gets tatted up in CD shops and English countryside with her son, well then you're going to have to march up Golgotha.
to hang on your own cross next to Jesus, crying between tears, blood, and baited breath, my God, my God.
Why have you forsaken me?
Why have you forgotten me, left me alone, left me for dead?
Joanie, a 17-year-old high school girl, went to the beach one summer in 1967.
She enthusiastically dove into the water, not knowing how shallow it was in her head at the bottom.
fracturing her spine between the fourth and fifth cervical level vertebrae.
She has now lived more than 50 years, paralyzed from her neck down.
And when she tells her own story, the first prayer, Joni says she prayed after her accident was why?
In her own words, for the longest time I tried to twist God's arm so he'd reveal why I had my accident.
And that prayer, some version of it, is the first kind of dialogue most people exchange with God when confronted by any variety of suffering.
Why this?
Why me?
Why now?
I called it dialogue, but the truth is it's more of a monologue because this type of prayer, these why prayers, both biblically and experientially, they are nearly always met with the silence of God, not a satisfying response.
She then turned from asking God for an explanation to asking God for a miracle.
She started confidently telling her friends, pray for my healing.
Next time you see me, I'm going to be standing up out of this wheelchair.
Three years into her suffering and God's seeming silence and no miracle, Joni was clinically depressed and she was battling suicidal ideation.
Jesus prayed the first line of Psalm 22 in Jerusalem.
before a majority Jewish crowd.
Now the Psalms are the prayer book of the Jewish people.
They committed most of the Psalms, if not all 150 Psalms.
to memory.
They recited these words in the temple each and every time they gathered to pray the first words of Psalm 22 before a Jewish crowd would have been like praying the first line of the Lord's Prayer in front of a Christian church or singing the first line of the Star Spangled Banner in front of a group of Americans.
The whole psalm is implied in just uttering the first line.
The whole ancient prayer would suddenly be downloaded into the imaginations of everyone who heard the first line of the ancient prayer and that
matters because that prayer reads this way, my God, my God, why have you forsaken me?
Why were you so far from saving me, so far from my cries of anguish?
My God, I cry out by day, but you do not answer by night, but I find no rest, yet you are enthroned as the holy one.
You are the one Israel praises and you are ancestors, put their trust.
They trusted and you delivered them to you.
They cried out and were saved and you they trusted and were not put to shame.
It's a prayer that begins with the felt sense of God's absence, but it doesn't stay there.
Here is the mystery unveiled in Jesus's final prayer, the mystery that is captured in Psalm 22.
God's presence is experienced most profoundly.
by praying through the pain of God's felt absence.
It is a great grace to experience God's presence in our feelings and thoughts.
But even when we don't, that doesn't mean that God is absent.
But only those who keep on praying apart from the good feeling that prayer sometimes offers
get to discover the rush of God's presence that comes to the waiting.
C.S.
Lewis wrote, I know now, Lord, why you utter no answer, you are yourself the answer.
Before your face, questions die away.
What other answer would suffice?
Similarly Psalm 73 reads, when I tried to understand all this, it troubled me deeply till I entered the sanctuary of God.
Joni, clinically depressed and battling suicidal ideation, prayed what she calls the most powerful prayer of her life.
God, if I can't die, show me how to live, please.
And later she would reflect he has chosen not to heal me but to hold me.
The more intense the pain the closer his embrace.
C.S.
Lewis, Jr., and Tada and the biblical Psalms, they all seem to be naming the great mystery and the great grace of prayer that where God's absence is most painfully felt, His presence is most profoundly revealed, if we pray through our pain.
And that's a whole lot more than just comforting theory.
That is the story of countless friends that I've walked with closely and my own story.
It's a story of friends that I've gotten to walk with through prolonged battles of infertility and countless miscarriages, through the loss of parents, siblings, friends, and children, through slowly debilitating diagnoses, and through immediately debilitating emergencies.
The anthropologist, Tonya Lourman, who authored this fascinating book called How God Becomes Real, notes that Christian prayer among all spiritual practices seems to have significant psychological benefits.
In fact, the psychological results from a non-praying person who begins to pray to Jesus are nearly identical to the psychological results of a new patient who begins CBT, cognitive behavioral therapy, which is among the most common and universally employed psychological techniques for revisiting, healing from, and overcoming trauma.
When we experience the pain of God's absence, praying through that absence is a gateway to our healing, overcoming, and even deepening our sense of God's presence, even on a psychological level.
In 2018, on top of her paralysis, Joni was in the midst of her second bout with stage three breast cancer.
And she was dazed and nauseous in the passenger seat of her car sitting next to her husband, Ken, as he was driving her home from another day of chemotherapy.
And as he looked at his wife reeling and broken next to him, he said to her, suffering is like splashovers of hell, isn't it?
And then they rode the rest of the way home in silence.
Until as they pulled into the driveway, Ken said, what do you think splashovers of heaven are?
Are they those easy breezy times when everything's going your way when you have your health?
Nah, Joni said.
Splashovers of heaven are finding Jesus in your splashover of hell.
And to find Jesus in your hell is ecstasy beyond compare.
You see, the ultimate fruit for those who pray through God's absence isn't the comfort of God's temporary presence and our pain as good as that is, but the sure hope
of God's constant presence without pain.
Jesus' Golgoth, the prayer, was His final words for approximately 72 hours.
But not His final words, because death for Jesus was not an end.
It was a new beginning.
And when Jesus was resurrected, He did not transcend His body.
He redeemed it.
scars are still on his skin telling the story of his victory and he invites his disciples to touch him and when they do their hand doesn't pass through a ghostly figure it runs into a flesh and blood skin and bone person.
The resurrection of Jesus means that the soul doesn't transcend the body but that both the soul and the body will be healed fully and finally.
And the return of Jesus means that one day soon, I will know God's constant presence in God's painless world without end, just like he always meant it to be.
And that is a comforting and abstract thought until you pray through your own Golgotha.
And on that day, when you do, if you do, it will become a sure and resilient foundation of hope.
Joni still believes that she's gonna stand up and walk out of her wheelchair one day.
What she's not sure about is when, whether it will be in this life or the next, but stand up and walk, she is sure that that is the future she's walking toward.
And that is the real gift.
That is the after amen fruit for those who pray through their pain, a sure hope that every last one of Jesus's promises is for real and for me.
So all this, my friends,
has been a very long introduction to a prayer-shaped life, a teaching series that's going to carry us from right now all the way up to Advent.
And the aim of this teaching series is not to convince you of the power of prayer.
It's to offer you a clear pathway to the devotion that sustains a life of prayer.
So our focus is going to be less on the words you speak between dear God and to amen, and more about who you become on the other side of all your amends.
And the practice that we're going to be rooted in in our britishan communities as we gather on tables throughout the week is prayer.
But the particular exercise that we're going to engage this week is the prophetic prayer training that's going to be happening in this room on Tuesday night at 6.30 p.m.
Now this is a come one and come all training, but it's also designed specifically for those of you who are enriched on communities because the focus of the evening is not going to be how to pray prophetically for someone in the peak moment of encounter during the close of a worship gathering.
The focus of the training is going to be how do I pray prophetically for a friend that I know deeply in the informal setting of my own living room?
So particularly if you're in a Georgetown community, please do prioritize this night.
And as much as possible, come with your community and sit with your community and engage the training as a community.
Because this Tuesday night in this room, we're gonna get all into the weeds about how to hear God's voice on behalf of one another.
And then the following week in our living rooms, we're gonna practice all that we learned together this coming Tuesday.
But to close for today,
Peter is likely the apprentice of Jesus that we know most about from the pages of scripture.
So to revisit our three mountains.
On Tabor, Peter is the only voice we hear other than God's, and he suggests camping out.
Stay in there forever in this cloudy, glowing place of prayer away from the chaos below.
Peter, not unlike me on the streets of New York and the schoolyards of Portland, thinks he wants a prayer of escape, not one of incarnation.
And on the Mount of Olives, Jesus asked Peter to keep watch with him, to stay up and pray beside him in his hour of need, and Peter falls asleep on the job.
And when he wakes up, he misunderstands the whole assignment, carrying out violence when Jesus has in mind to redeem every wrong, including violence by suffering and sacrifice.
And as for Golgotha, Peter never makes it there.
After three denials in the courtyard, he doesn't even show up in the crowd that sees Jesus' last breath, that here's his final prayer.
Peter is absent in the very place where God is most present.
And after all of that, Jesus goes to find him, not to reprimand him or condemn him or correct him, but to forgive him and restore him.
So listen, I hope that you will devote yourself to prayer.
I hope you will root your life in the only source of devotion that makes you more not less, but I know that no matter how strong your desire or fervent you will follow through, God is more devoted to communion with you than you will ever be to Him.
God longs to hear your prayers more than you will ever long to pray them and to speak love to your soul more than you will ever long to hear His voice and receive it.
So why don't we stand and we'll respond together now.
Would you come Holy Spirit?
Thanks for joining the Bridgestown family as we engage in this teaching series.
To learn more about the life of our church and how you can get involved, visit bridgestown.church.com.
If you're interested in contributing financially to Bridgestown Church and to our ministry, you can do that at bridgestown.church.gov.
Wherever you're joining us from, we hope this resource blesses you and encourages you to be with Jesus, become like Jesus, and do what Jesus did.